# 20220223

> Men make their own history, but they do not make it as they please; they do not make it under self-selected circumstances, but under circumstances existing already, given and transmitted from the past. The tradition of all dead generations weighs like a nightmare on the brains of the living. And just as they seem to be occupied with revolutionizing themselves and things, creating something that did not exist before, precisely in such epochs of revolutionary crisis they anxiously conjure up the spirits of the past to their service, borrowing from them names, battle slogans, and costumes in order to present this new scene in world history in time-honored disguise and borrowed language. Thus Luther put on the mask of the Apostle Paul, the Revolution of 1789-1814 draped itself alternately in the guise of the Roman Republic and the Roman Empire, and the Revolution of 1848 knew nothing better to do than to parody, now 1789, now the revolutionary tradition of 1793-95. In like manner, the beginner who has learned a new language always translates it back into his mother tongue, but he assimilates the spirit of the new language and expresses himself freely in it only when he moves in it without recalling the old and when he forgets his native tongue.
> 
> &#x2014; [[Karl Marx]], [[The 18th Brumaire of Louis Bonaparte]]

-   Men make their own history, but, like the [[unconscious]] in [[Freud]]&rsquo;s thought, do so according to whims that they do not realize
-   [[Revolution]], thus far, has been only a facsimile of what has come before
-   One of the goals for a communist movement would be to overcome this unconsciousness and make history according to our collective whim

> &ldquo;Every time we hear that a possible solution simply cannot be done, we may be sure on general scientific grounds that it can. Every time we hear that a solution is not economic, we ought to ask: “for whom?”—since it is people, just people, who will have to pay. Every time we hear that a proposal will destroy society as we know it, we should have the courage to say: “Thank God; at last.” And whenever we hear that it will destroy our freedom, we should be very cautious indeed. For such freedom as we have is our most treasured possession, and we know how to be vigilant. Yet for that very reason, this is the simplest method that the powerful have to cling to power: to convince people that any other concession of that power would be unsafe.&rdquo;
> 
> &#x2014; [[Stafford Beer]]

